{{Other uses|Hello (disambiguation)}}\n{{Redirect|Hallo}}\n{{pp-semi|small=yes}}\n\n'''''Hello''''' is a [[salutation]] or [[greeting habits|greeting]] in the [[English language]]. It is first attested in writing around the 1860s.<ref>[http:\/\/dictionary.reference.com\/browse\/hello \"Hello\" Origins] http:\/\/dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved 2012-10-23.<\/ref>\n\n==First use==\n''Hello'', with that spelling, was used in publications as early as 1833. These include an 1833 American book called ''The Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee'',<ref>(Anonymous). [http:\/\/books.google.com\/books?id=RZsOAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA144&dq=hello&lr=lang_en&as_drrb_is=b&as_minm_is=0&as_miny_is=1400&as_maxm_is=0&as_maxy_is=1838&num=100&as_brr=0&ie=ISO-8859-1&output=html ''The Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee''.] New York: J. & J. Harper, 1833. p. 144.<\/ref> which was reprinted that same year in ''[[Literary Gazette|The London Literary Gazette]]''.<ref>[http:\/\/books.google.com\/books?id=NVsZAAAAMAAJ&pg=RA1-PA803&dq=hello&lr=lang_en&as_drrb_is=b&as_minm_is=0&as_miny_is=1400&as_maxm_is=0&as_maxy_is=1838&num=100&as_brr=0&ie=ISO-8859-1&output=html \"''The Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee''.\"] '' The London Literary Gazette; and Journal of Belles Lettres, Arts, Sciences, &c.'' No. 883: December 21, 1833. p. 803.<\/ref>\n\nThe word was extensively used in literature by the 1860s.<ref>[http:\/\/dictionary.reference.com\/browse\/hello] Origin of the word.<\/ref>\n\n==Etymology==\nAccording to the ''[[Oxford English Dictionary]]'', ''hello'' is an alteration of ''hallo'', ''hollo'',<ref>\"[http:\/\/dictionary.oed.com\/cgi\/entry\/50104517 ''Hello''].\" ''[[Oxford English Dictionary Online]]''. Second Edition, 1989. [[Oxford University Press]]. Accessed 09 Sep 2008.<\/ref> which came from [[Old High German]] \"''hal\u00e2'', ''hol\u00e2'', emphatic imperative of ''hal\u00f4n'', ''hol\u00f4n'' to fetch, used especially in hailing a ferryman.\"<ref>\"[http:\/\/dictionary.oed.com\/cgi\/entry\/50101836 ''Hallo''].\" ''OED Online''. Second Edition, 1989. [[Oxford University Press]]. Accessed 09 Sep 2008.<\/ref> It also connects the development of ''hello'' to the influence of an earlier form, ''holla'', whose origin is in the French ''hol\u00e0'' (roughly, 'whoa there!', from French ''l\u00e0'' 'there').<ref>\"[http:\/\/dictionary.oed.com.proxy2.cl.msu.edu:2047\/cgi\/entry\/50107177 ''holla'', ''int.'' and ''n.'']\". ''OED Online''. Retrieved October 4, 2008.<\/ref> As in addition to ''hello'', ''halloo'',<ref>Butler, Mann, ''[http:\/\/archive.org\/details\/historyofcommonw00butl A History of the Commonwealth of Kentucky]'', Wilcox, Dickerman & Co., 1834, p. 106.<\/ref> ''hallo'', ''hollo'', ''hullo'' and (rarely) ''hillo'' also exist as variants or related words, the word can be spelt using any of all five vowels.{{citation needed|date=August 2012}}\n\n===Telephone===\nThe use of ''hello'' as a [[telephone]] greeting has been credited to [[Thomas Edison]]; according to one source, he expressed his surprise with a misheard ''Hullo''.<ref>{{cite web|url=http:\/\/www.collectorcafe.com\/article_archive.asp?article=800&id=1507|title=The First \"Hello!\": Thomas Edison, the Phonograph and the Telephone \u2013 Part 2|author=Allen Koenigsberg|publisher=Antique Phonograph Magazine, Vol.VIII No.6|accessdate=2006-09-13}}<\/ref> [[Alexander Graham Bell]] initially used ''[[Ahoy (greeting)|Ahoy]]'' (as used on ships) as a telephone greeting.<ref>{{cite web|url=http:\/\/www2.cs.uh.edu\/~klong\/papers\/hello.txt|title=All Things Considered|author=Allen Koenigsberg|publisher=National Public Radio|accessdate=2006-09-13|year=1999}}<\/ref><ref name=etymology>{{Cite web |url= http:\/\/www.etymonline.com\/index.php?search=hello&searchmode=none |title=Online Etymology Dictionary |work=etymonline.com\n |accessdate=28 September 2010}}<\/ref> However, in 1877, Edison wrote to T.B.A. David, the president of the Central District and Printing Telegraph Company of [[Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania|Pittsburgh]]:\n\n{{quote|Friend David, I do not think we shall need a call bell as Hello! can be heard 10 to 20 feet away.\nWhat you think? Edison - P.S. first cost of sender & receiver to manufacture is only $7.00.<ref>{{cite web |url=http:\/\/www.collectorcafe.com\/article_archive.asp?article=800&id=1507 |title=The First \"Hello!\": Thomas Edison, the Phonograph and the Telephone \u2013 Part 2 |author=Allen Koenigsberg |accessdate=1 August 2012}}<\/ref>}}\n\nBy 1889, central telephone exchange operators were known as 'hello-girls' due to the association between the greeting and the telephone.<ref name=etymology\/>\n\n===Hullo===\n''Hello'' may be derived from ''hullo'', which the American [[Merriam-Webster]] dictionary describes as a \"chiefly British variant of hello,\"<ref name=\"MW\">{{cite web|url=http:\/\/www.merriam-webster.com\/dictionary\/hullo |title=hullo - Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary |publisher=Merriam-webster.com |date=2007-04-25 |accessdate=2009-09-26}}<\/ref> and which was originally used as an exclamation to call attention, an expression of surprise, or a greeting. ''Hullo'' is found in publications as early as 1803.<ref>[http:\/\/books.google.com\/books?id=27sCAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA12&dq=hullo&lr=&as_drrb_is=b&as_minm_is=0&as_miny_is=1760&as_maxm_is=0&as_maxy_is=1804&num=100&as_brr=0&ie=ISO-8859-1&output=html ''The Sporting Magazine.''] London (1803). Volume 23, p. 12.<\/ref> The word ''hullo'' is still in use, with the meaning  ''hello''.<ref name=\"hullo\">{{cite web|author=phpBB + phpBB Search Engine Indexer |url=http:\/\/forum.downsizer.net\/archive\/hullo-from-orkney__o_t__t_36387.html |title=Hullo From Orkney |publisher=Forum.downsizer.net |date= |accessdate=2009-09-26}}<\/ref><ref name=\"hullo1\">{{cite web|author=Piers Beckley |url=http:\/\/www.bbc.co.uk\/blogs\/writersroom\/2008\/04\/hullo_again.shtml |title=Writersroom Blog: Hullo again. Did you miss me? |publisher=BBC |date=2008-04-23 |accessdate=2009-09-26}}<\/ref><ref name=\"hullo2\">{{cite news|url=http:\/\/www.guardian.co.uk\/technology\/2005\/feb\/23\/mobilephones.g2 |title=Paris for a day &#124; Technology |publisher=The Guardian |date= 2005-02-23|accessdate=2009-09-26 | location=London | first=Laura | last=Barton}}<\/ref><ref name=\"hullo3\">{{cite news|url=http:\/\/www.guardian.co.uk\/sport\/2009\/jul\/16\/ashes-england-australia-live-report |title=Ashes: England v Australia - day one as it happened &#124; Andy Bull and Rob Smyth &#124; Sport &#124; guardian.co.uk |publisher=Guardian |date= 2009-07-16|accessdate=2009-09-26 | location=London}}<\/ref><ref name=\"hullo4\">{{cite news|url=http:\/\/news.bbc.co.uk\/sport1\/hi\/football\/europe\/4444713.stm |title=BBC SPORT &#124; Football &#124; Europe &#124; Semi-final clash excites fans |publisher=BBC News |date=2005-04-14 |accessdate=2009-09-26}}<\/ref>\n\n===Hallo and hollo===\n''Hello'' is alternatively thought to come from the word ''hallo'' (1840) via ''hollo'' (also ''holla'', ''holloa'', ''halloo'', ''halloa'').<ref name=\"MW\">{{cite web|url=http:\/\/www.m-w.com\/dictionary\/hello|title=Hello|publisher=Merriam-Webster Online}}<\/ref> The definition of ''hollo'' is to shout or an exclamation originally shouted in a [[fox hunt|hunt]] when the quarry was spotted:<ref name=\"MW\" \/>  \n{{quote|If I fly, Marcius,\/Halloo me like a hare.|''[[Coriolanus (play)|Coriolanus]]'' (I.viii.7), [[William Shakespeare]]}}\n[[Fowler's]] has it that \"hallo\" is first recorded \"as a shout to call attention\" in 1864.<ref>''The New Fowler's'', revised third edition by R. W. Burchfield, Oxford University Press.  ISBN 0-19-860263-4, p. 356.<\/ref>\nIt is used by [[Samuel Taylor Coleridge]]'s famous poem ''[[The Rime of the Ancient Mariner]]'' written in 1798:\n{{quote|\nAnd the good south wind still blew behind,<br \/>\nBut no sweet bird did follow,<br \/> \nNor any day for food or play <br \/>\nCame to the mariners' hollo!}}\n\n''Hallo'' is also [[German language|German]], [[Danish language|Danish]], [[Norwegian language|Norwegian]], [[Dutch language|Dutch]] and [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]] for Hello. It is used in the Dutch language as early as 1797 in a letter from [[Willem Bilderdijk]] to his sister in law as a remark of astonishment.<ref>Bilderdijk, Willem  [http:\/\/www.dbnl.org\/tekst\/bild002lief01_01\/bild002lief01_01_0107.php?q=hallo ''Liefde en ballingschap. Brieven 1795-1797''] (ed. Marita Mathijsen). Uitgeverij De Arbeiderspers, Amsterdam\/Antwerp 1997<\/ref> \n\n[[Webster's dictionary]] from 1913 traces the etymology of ''holloa'' to the Old English ''halow'' and suggests: \"Perhaps from ah + lo; compare Anglo Saxon eal\u0101.\"\n\nAccording to the ''[[American Heritage Dictionary]]'', ''hallo'' is a modification of the obsolete ''holla'' (''stop!''), perhaps from Old French ''hola'' (''ho'', ho! + ''la'', there, from Latin ''illac'', that way).<ref>{{cite web|url=http:\/\/www.bartelby.com\/61\/60\/H0136000.html|title=Hello|publisher= The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: Fourth Edition.|year=2000|accessdate=2006-09-01}}<\/ref>\n\nThe Old English verb, h\u01fdlan (1. wv\/t1b 1 to heal, cure, save; greet, salute; geh\u01fdl! Hosanna!), may be the ultimate origin of the word.<ref>[http:\/\/home.comcast.net\/~modean52\/oeme_dictionaries.htm OEME Dictionaries]<\/ref> H\u01fdlan is likely a cognate of German Heil (meaning ''complete'' for things and ''healthy'' for beings) and other similar words of Germanic origin.  [[Bill Bryson]] asserts in his book ''Mother Tongue'' that \"hello\" comes from Old English ''h\u00e1l b\u00e9o \u00feu'' (\"Hale be thou\", or \"whole be thou\", meaning a wish for good health) (see also \"goodbye\" which is a contraction of \"God be with you\".\n\n===Cognates===\n{{Section OR|date=March 2009}}\nThe word \"hello\" is found in many other languages. It is often only used when answering the telephone, or as an informal greeting.\n{| class=\"wikitable\"\n|-\n! Language\n! Cognate\n! Usage\n|-\n| [[Afrikaans]]\n| hallo\n| general greeting\n|-\n| [[Albanian language|Albanian]]\n| alo\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Arabic language|Arabic]]\n| \u0622\u0644\u0648  ''\u0101l\u014d''\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Assamese language|Assamese]]\n| \u09b9\u09c7\u09b2\u09cd\u09b2\u09cb ''h\u00eallo''\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Bengali language|Bengali]]\n| \u09b9\u09cd\u09af\u09be\u09b2\u09cb ''h\u00ealo''\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Bulgarian language|Bulgarian]]\n| \u0430\u043b\u043e ''(alo)''\n| when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Cantonese]]\n| \u54c8\u4f6c\uff01 (Hah Loe!) \n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Catalan language|Catalan]]\n| hola!\n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Croatian language|Croatian]]\n| halo?\n| when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Czech language|Czech]]\n| Hal\u00f3?\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Danish language|Danish]]\n| hallo!\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Dutch language|Dutch]]\n| hallo!\n| general greeting, normally not used for answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Esperanto]]\n| ha lo?\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Estonian language|Estonian]]\n| hallo; halloo\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Finnish language|Finnish]]\n| haloo?\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[French language|French]]\n| all\u00f4?\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[German language|German]]\n| Hallo?, Hallo!\n| when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n|[[Greek language|Greek]]\n| \u03a0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03ce?''(parakalo)'', \u039d\u03b1\u03b9! ''(Ne)''\n| when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n|[[Gujarati language|Gujarati]]\n| \u0ab9\u0ab2\u0acb (hal\u00f3)\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|rowspan=\"2\" | [[Hungarian language|Hungarian]]\n| hell\u00f3!\n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| hall\u00f3!\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Hebrew language|Hebrew]]\n| \u05d4\u05b8\u05dc\u05d5\u05b9 ''(hallo)''\n| when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Hindi language|Hindi]]\n| \u0939\u0932\u094b ''(hal\u00f3)''\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Icelandic language|Icelandic]]\n| Hall\u00f3\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Irish language|Irish]]\n| Heileo\n| Rarely used\n|-\n| [[Japanese language|Japanese]]\n| \u30cf\u30ed\u30fc\u3000''(har\u014d)''\n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n|[[Kannada language|Kannada]]\n| halloa\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Khmer Language|Khmer]]\n| all\u00f4\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Lithuanian language|Lithuanian]]\n| alio?\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Macedonian language|Macedonian]]\n|\u0430\u043b\u043e ''(alo)''\n|when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| [[Mandarin Chinese|Mandarin]]\n| \u54c8\u5570\uff01 (H\u01ce Lu\u00f3!) \n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n|[[Marathi language|Marathi]]\n|hello\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Norwegian language|Norwegian]]\n|hallo!\n|general greeting\n|-\n| [[Oriya language|Oriya]]\n| \u0b39\u0b3e\u0b32\u0b4b\/\u0b39\u0b47\u0b32\u0b4b ''(h\u0101l\u00f3\/h\u00e9l\u00f3)''\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Persian language|Persian]]\n| \u0627\u0644\u0648 alo\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Polish language|Polish]]\n| halo\n| when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Portuguese language|Portuguese]]\n| al\u00f4?\n| when answering the telephone (Brazil only)\n|-\n|[[Romanian language|Romanian]]\n|alo\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Russian language|Russian]]\n| \u0430\u043b\u043b\u043e ''(allo)'', \u0430\u043b\u0451\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Serbian language|Serbian]]\n|\u0445\u0430\u043b\u043e\/halo\n|when answering the telephone \/ friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n|rowspan=\"2\" | [[Spanish language|Spanish]]\n| \u00a1hola!\n| friendly (informal) greeting\n|-\n| \u00bfal\u00f3?\n| (Latin America) when answering the telephone\n|-\n| [[Swedish language|Swedish]]\n| hall\u00e5!\n|\n|-\n|[[Tagalog language|Tagalog]]\n|helo!\n|\n|-\n|[[Tamil language|Tamil]]\n|\u0b85\u0bb2\u0bcb? (\u0101 lo)\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Thai language|Thai]]\n|\u0e2e\u0e31\u0e25\u0e42\u0e2b\u0e25 (h\u0101n l\u01d2)\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Turkish language|Turkish]]\n|alo!\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Ukrainian language|Ukrainian]]\n|\u0430\u043b\u043e!\n|when answering the telephone\n|-\n|[[Vietnamese language|Vietnamese]]\n|a l\u00f4!\n|when answering the telephone\n|}\n\n==\"Hello, World\" computer program==\n{{Main|Hello world program}}\nStudents learning a new computer programming language will often begin by writing a [[Hello world program|\"Hello, world!\" program]], which outputs that greeting to a display screen or printer. The widespread use of this tradition arose from an introductory chapter of the book ''[[The C Programming Language (book)|The C Programming Language]]'' by Kernighan & Ritchie, which reused the following example taken from earlier memos by Brian Kernighan at Bell Labs:\n\n<source lang=\"c\">\n int main() \n {\n        printf(\"hello, world\");\n }<\/source>\n\n==The Apple DOS HELLO program==\n\nA diskette formatted to boot Apple DOS 3.x on the Apple II series of computers will look for a BASIC program to run automatically after the operating system has booted. By default, the name of the program is HELLO, and is specified as a parameter of the INIT command used to format a floppy disk. For the HELLO program to work, it has to be created in the same language (Integer BASIC or Applesoft BASIC) that is present in the language ROM of the system the disk is being booted on.\n\n== Perception of \"Hello\" in other nations ==\n\nIn some other nations, especially the ones that had little contact with foreigners at the time, Westerners were often viewed as people who constantly said \"hello\" and little else. Chinese novelist [[Jung Chang]] describes this view as follows:\n{{quote|In my mind... foreigners said 'hello' all the time, with an odd intonation.... When boys played 'guerrilla warfare,' which was their version of cowboys and Indians, the enemy side would have thorns glued onto their noses and say 'hello' all the time.|Chang, Jung<ref name=\"chang\">{{cite book\n| last = Chang\n| first = Jung\n| authorlink = Jung Chang\n| title = [[Wild Swans]]\n| publisher = Simon & Schuster\n| year = 1991\n| location = New York\n| page = 247}}<\/ref>}}\n\n==See also==\n*[[Aloha]]\n*[[As-Salamu Alaykum]]\n*[[Ciao]]\n*[[Kia ora]]\n*[[Namaste]]\n*[[Shalom]]\n*[[World Hello Day]]\n\n== References ==\n{{Reflist|30em}}\n\n== External links ==\n{{Wiktionary|hello|hi|hey|hiya}}\n* [http:\/\/www.elite.net\/~runner\/jennifers\/hello.htm Hello in more than 800 languages]\n* [http:\/\/dictionary.oed.com\/cgi\/entry\/50107205?query_type=word&queryword=hollo&first=1&max_to_show=10&sort_type=alpha&result_place=1&search_id=MJDi-YER2WO-12323&hilite=50107205 OED online entry for ''hollo''] (Subscription)\n* [[Merriam-Webster Dictionary]]: [http:\/\/www.merriam-webster.com\/dictionary\/hollo hollo], [http:\/\/www.merriam-webster.com\/dictionary\/hullo hullo]\n* [http:\/\/www.life.com\/image\/first\/in-gallery\/54371\/how-to-say-hello-around-the-world#index\/0 How to Say Hello Around the World] - slideshow by ''[[Life magazine]]''\n\n[[Category:Greeting words and phrases]]\n[[Category:English words]]
